Meeting in New Lambton hall (14 Alma Rd) re. landslide.
Wednesday the 10th of September, 2025.
Transcriber & editor: Megan Mathews. Editor's notes for clarity post-transcription are bounded with parentheses. Missed words are marked with an ellipsis.
Unfortunately I was plagued with battery issues in this meeting & didn't transcribe as much as I'd hoped.

List & details of attendees (non-exhaustive):
Melissa Gore ("m"). 
Melissa is the recovery co-ordinator and according to LinkedIn, works for the "DISPEL GROUP" as the/a director, and also for "The MJG Company", as managing director. She/her company have been contracted by the City of Newcastle (CN).

Glen ? ("g")
?

Chris ?
?

Councillor Peta Winney-Baartz ("p").
Peta is a councillor for Ward 3 and is chair of Council's Infrastructure Strategic Advisory Committee.

Andrew (Andy) Ball ("a").
Andrew is the/a project manager. According to LinkedIn he's studied Building Construction Management (2000) & a Master of Business (2012) at the University of Newcastle.

CN CEO Jeremy Bath ("j").

Robert Dudgeon, Interim Executive Director of City Infrastructure ("r").
Robert has been a Council project manager of one type or another for about 15 years, and was an architect prior to that.

Wade ("w")


18:09 
m: ...I can't give you a promise that all your questions can be answered. We're here 'til 8 & if you feel you have questions that haven't been answered … we'll make sure you've had the opportunity to have your questions answered... Hunter Water and … gonna be here tonight, thank you Glen and Chris for your attendance … I know there's been...questions regarding the reports and scope of works for geotech. You will each receive a copy of the scope of works for the geotechnical investigation tonight...it has been peer reviewed, it's gone through the ... authorities ... Andy Ball, my colleague, will speak ... 

j: I acknowledge the part that ISN'T in the room, the NSW Government Reconstruction Authority… you (all) know who they are now... this is an agency of the NSW Government that was only set up 2.5 years ago... purpose for assisting people like you, people who through no fault of their own, potentially losing their homes... (note: tone is dramatic) this is the reason the agency exists. It was pleasing to hear some of you on the radio this morning calling out the absence of the reconstruction authority... but I imPLORE you … (to write and) meet with political people & ask the Reconstruction Authority why they aren't here- their primary role is for issues like this...phone call within 2 days from the minister...it was a genuine call but I haven't had any phone calls since... she was good enough to come out & she toured the site... there are a lot of bureaucrats who SHOULD be helping.. my message here tonight is (for all of us) to call upon the NSW Government, specifically the Reconstruction Authority… I hand over to Andy Ball, one of our senior project managers…

Question from Caroline: Are you guys putting in a submission?
j: We will be. I've already got, from my 3 board councillors, notes of motion... to instruct us to put in a detailed submission in regard to the reconstruction authority's responses to this reconstruction disaster… all other minutes & motions have been supported unanimously that have gone before council this year... we call on EVERYone to hold to account... all credit to NSW they are holding an enquiry in the NSW recovery's response-

p jumps in: my understanding is that it was set up that this review would happen... it was always gonna happen.. this is actually an enquiry into the reconstruction authority, and all they intend to do... (is perform a routine review) of the entire system. It's actually a review that was already gonnna happen, but... it's vital of you (affected homeowners) to enter (individual) submissions.

j: … it's being reviewed in terms of its statutory obligations but it calls out its response...

(Julian asked a question.)
Answer: I think it's better for you (all) to respond individually... you'd all have different responses in terms of your insurance... different opinions...should be putting in your submissions... you're best off doing an individual submission because (p is nodding vigorously)… trying to get 16 different property owners… lots of compromise...

p: ...the opportunity to engage with you and ask you for further information is greater... I'd encourage every single one of you to submit a...

a: I think you're asking about the scope of works?

m: we do have the scope of works... we do... the whole point is so that you can take that away… update... we'll take initial questions. This is not the last conversation (that will be held around that). We'll also email a copy out...

a: Thank you, Jeremy, my name's Andy … I work with the City of Newcastle, I became involved from around June... I'm gonna do my best.. don't wanna talk to the first 3 weeks... 88,XXX square metres, so quite large, 16 private properties... from June in response to recommendations made by Geotechnical Engineers, some emergency works were conducted... predominantly the work was … (in) the upper areas of the landslip.. moving across through to the rear of properties in Russell Rd... core focus was trying to minimise continued movement from water ingress … water ingress was one of the reasons causing the slide.. .important to close up the large scarps in response to recommendations from geotechnical engineers (Robert Carr & Associates- RCA) and in response to significant movement around the 24th of June particularly near Russell Rd… (we) pushed material to fill in the scarp (in order to prevent water ingress)... it's about filling the scarp, protecting it from water coming in and trying to slow down the movement... a lot of works focussed there, and along Victoria Street, a lot of cracks opened up. …. it was responsive & also responsive to dynamic site conditions changing... in parallel with that & over the course of July, the scope of works was put together. It wasn't a simple process of RCA telling us what to do. Although they were able to respond quickly & come on site but how to investigate what is a really complex problem takes more time... next step is to consult with Transport for NSW (TfNSW) & the NSW Reconstruction Authority on that scope of works because 1, across their road and rail assets they have 9000 slopes, they deal with landslips on a yearly basis, they have geotechs, so there was a technical benefit in involving them, and 2, because TfNSW are the administering agency for works that involve anything related to public assets. For us to conduct that scope of works it made sense to make sure they were onboard. We need to make sure the output we're going to get for it was prepared in such a way that allows us to move smoothly. It's important for everyone to be onboard… important part of working with TfNSW, once we had support we clicked things into gear and RCA have been on site for the best part of 5 weeks. I'm gonna draw your attention to .. 2nd part of involvement with TfNSW was partly about technical input, and also about wording. You can see on the first page it focusses on public assets and roads... quite deliberate... make sure it sits in perfect alignment with disaster recovery... the reality is and the argument we've always put is that … 11 & a half thousand square metres that's moved. To understand, our geotechs need to look at the whole thing... the map in the scope of works shows you a cross section of roads and private properties... it is a really good sample of what's happening to the land slip. The scope if we were to summarise is 16 boreholes across 10 locations, positioned to achieve cross sections. Some have instruments, some are for taking samples. The next steps are ground modelling based on analysing lab data, cataloguing bore logs, creating a model of underground, creating surface geometries... the rain didn't help. We had continued movement with the monitoring... Sydney-Newcastle survey team have been out there on a weekly basis picking up 60 points maybe more in roads, infrastructure, properties, and there's been continual movement. It varies, but it's always influenced by rain. On the 23rd of August there was another significant movement. The site is considered dynamic. ...monitoring survey... however we need more surface geometries. It's gonna be a combination of points taken in the field, and LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) with drones ... (this LiDAR imagery) will get put over RCA's information …. they'll start to analyse that. The intents of the findings is to give insight into the cause, underlying Geotechnical factors, and what the potential options are moving forward. It's difficult to say right now. The team hasn't moved through the investigation. They'll need more survey... too early to say "here are all the answers". There are things that we probably can say though- 1 is (regarding) the slip plain- the deepest part we know is roughly 9 metres deep, it's really deep. Not the whole thing is like that, but one part is. We also know that somewhere, the ground state as it is right now is not conducive to... can't go straight back in to rebuild without ground improvement or some kind of stabilisation. We don't know what those options are right now... that's … time off... then peer review... public works offered early in the piece to peer review it. TfNSW are interested in it regarding Russell Rd. They are a stakeholder. That's gonna take time. It's difficult to know without having control over TfNSW how long that will take. It may not close out before the new year. I will do my best but that's possible. I don't know if there's anything...

m: It's really important for people to understand the timeline... it's the answer everyone wants… I can sit here & tell you now we don't have that answer. We don't know, and I know that is really hard to hear because you want to know "am I going to be able to go back home?"! … really, really hard question... I want us to be able to talk about that and acknowledge that there is a huge amount of … for everybody... for us as well... questions we have to ask... with the rain, the ground will continue to move... that's a known fact... we do everything we can … something we're constantly doing is looking at and responding to.... scope of works is one thing... some of the holes were drilled but collapsed... you know, we WANT to share this, we WANT you to read this, but you need to work WITH us … these decisions are made by the specialists… communicate with one another... I don't want to say "well this (SoW) says where the 10 holes were gonna be", I'm gonna call that out, it's really important... we want you to take this away now... there also might be things we need to take on notice... we've got (to have) time to consult technical staff who can't be with us...

Question from the bloke next to Nick Wang to a: you alluded to a change in October?

a: shouldn't impact … just means my job's harder because I'm dealing with different people... model... QLD… operates... federal level, state level, then you have public works and TfNSW. ...(The latter 2) are administering funding on behalf of the NSW RA who are receiving funding from (the federal level)… public works is a little different. There are categories. A category C is things like community halls... Category A is a whole range of things, some of those things may have been activated … public works get slotted in there.. from 1 October that all gets rolled up ... response of managing councils gets rolled up into NSW RA. The only difference it makes here is that I don't know if I will be talking to a claims assessor from TfNSW or...

j: I wanna be very clear- there will be ZERO impact... not one dollar. We are absorbing those costs... some of those (note: aggressive, pointy hand gestures)...

Question from Warren: I thought the .. what caused the landslip was pretty clear. My concern was the language used around that. I'm conscious of the language used in relation to this current investigation...
 
a: At the end of the day, the preliminary report states that the movement appears to be from a natural disaster.

Warren: Some of the … insurance... as you're aware... those who wish to make a claim earlier don't want to go through that … council on one side...

a: We'll take that on board... geotechnical conditions combined with the east coast low... what were the geotechnical conditions… I understand where you're coming from...

Warren: This one is quite clear, but I'm super conscious that we just need to personally... we've got to be very careful what the cause of …

r: Wanna be assured that we've done everything we can that's going on … we know the cause was rainfall, what was the strata that caused the slip & so on...

m: Insurance concerns are quite common… if you are having challenges just give me a call... it's important to make sure you're being treated correctly.. insurance companies don't like to pay. Please come and talk to me. There's also, for those who need it... legal aid, specialised disaster recovery team
r: we've seen that before too where insurance parties didn't wanna come in... we've had discussions... Any more questions about the scope of works?

Suzanne: I don't know if I'm jumping the gun, but for Andy, Jeremy and Clive, I know we're going through this process of 20 weeks... as it's going through there was relief as there was no movement... we're getting more weather... is there anything (more) that can be done to limit chance of it expanding and moving?

a: We're doing work as of yesterday back up to the scarp on the rear of the Russell Road properties. Movement has opened it (again) so we closed it. That's all an effort of minimising movement, it's not a fix....

j: Your question is is there anything that can be done proactively rather than reactively?

Suzanne: Exactly- there are houses that were looking ok & now they're not...

r: You could compact that ground* but that risks structural instability.. could shed the water but that's not the answer in the long run either

j: So no there's not really anything that can be done... people who are feeling they've dodged a bullet now haven't dodged a bullet... people outside of the danger zone might be thinking wow, is... we're not gonna sit back and allow houses that aren't currently in the danger zone to fall in to it... it continues to rain, and even if the rain stops, the ground may continue to slide... the groundwater doesn't have time to go away... it's like a sponge. Once a sponge is full, once the sponge is full the water will sit on top. It's playing out everywhere, once the ground is full, there's...
 
m: That (would be) really hard to hear, that your house... may not look the same again... it's important ... the monitoring we're doing... I wanna reiterate the importance of safety... nothing harder than to know that your home is right there... some of those houses... safety is so important... I was down there not that long ago... it's scary to think that collapse could happen... we're trying to manage site safety... people want to come and have a look ... as a group... how you talk & deal with this is an important part of the recovery journey... it's about what actually happened... financial, impaort structural, emotional...

j: If you look at 6 Baker Street, the period between that property collapsing and the emergency (demolition?) order was less than a month. That's a very rapid period of time... you should all be unfortunately seeing that as a warning as how quickly a situation can change. The first week, the 23rd of May, every call I received from a resident was ... pissed off... "I challenge your authority..." I think people have realised ...it's like an earthquake... once the land starts sliding, without intervention, the houses will continue to slide...

Caroline: I've got a question- the process of the way anyone gets in contact with the council and says "Hey, I've got an issue", what's the follow up process? (silence)
Because David & I got no follow-up. We were the first people to know that there was cracking...

David: It (6(?) Baker St) was closed the day prior (22nd of May)...

j: The best action you can take is to call Mel. ... Mel is employed to be...

r: Are you referring to prior to landslip?

Caroline: Yes.

r: We have potholes & cracks in the city, we prioritise...our team wouldn't necessarily have known that until they attended the site-

m: Our response rate has been 24 hours-

r: We know there's an effect there now. If there's a crack we will get there and assess that, but that crack would have been assessed in isolation. They'd be looking at it from a road construction perspective.

j: That crack wouldn't have been treated as a landslide.

David: That crack was THAT wide....

Caroline: They told us, tell Council & declare a major incident.

j: It's easy to be wise after the event. There's no action that we could have taken to prevent the event. There's nothing we could have done. Perhaps we could have started the evacuation process earlier.

David: aolines' Baker Street & Victoria Street...

m: How was it reported to council?

Caroline: Just, the follow up-

David: Website... phone call... I've sent the meia though. That was the question. I think you've already started to say this was ... scope... triage process- cool, got that,... similar, but we look at the other side of the hill and the intersection ... looks very, very similar.

?: You see that now?

David: No, that was reported 6-8 weeks ago.

Caroline: I did say to them specifically-

r: You were evacuated on the Tuesday- no one knew about that. The SES knew that, but not the police... no one knew about that... on the Friday morning when the landslide occurred, that was the first time that any other agencies ... police have triggered ... 

j: We can take that on notice... we will undoubtedly have that conversation with the SES as to why there were days between issuing the evacuation order and telling Council... dealing with many issues at the time... volunteer labour... not saying it's accepted but just as most of you weren't aware when the first evacuation happened, we weren't told either.

m: ...they open incident control emergency management by that agency. That agency and those who are responsible to escalate it to ... somewhere between that being done and responding to multiple callouts for trees down,... evacuation order hasn't made it up in time.

Julian: ...  if there was movement on Russell Rd?

a: no not really because it's a council managed rd... if it was more major that TfNSW managed... it's Council

j: it's one of the many rds that the state gov says "that's your responsibility!"... not black n white... certainly strengthens TfNSW stepping up n getting involved... gonna take a weight of evidence to "shame" the state gov into stepping in and getting involved. 

m: in the interest of time... not to say that this conversation is over... at the end... q 'n' a... to the agents that are here to give u a quick update.

g: I'm the executive manager & customer deliverer.. lots of teams that report to me that cover maintenance, engineering and construction teams within hunter water... everyone works for me... when the landslip happened, the sewer system at the bottom of the hill... gravity... carrier main near 6 Baker St and creek line that was shifted. We had to get engineering teams out to get a solution for customers to the western side of the evacuation area... you may b aware that a sewer main was installed in an emergency operation ... prevent sewer getting to the creek line... our maintenance teams installed that... remains in place and continues to provide the sewer service along the base of the creek line... when there has been more ground mvmt there has been breakage to the lines... had to cap off ... prevent leakages. At this stage, the water and the sewer services have been effectively disconnected to all the houses within the evacuation area. At this stage we need to understand more around the Geotechnical investigation and with ground mvmt continuing, if we r getting in there and doing work we could have even further destabilisations... we're not seeing the need to be getting in there and doing that... we really need to understand the extent of the (de)stabilisation of the ground... another key point w those services- we would use different types of pipe systems to install into that area.. when we're able to get back in there, are... if you've seen black looking pipes, polyethylene are the types we'd be most likely to put back in. The 2 ends are melded and put back together, they allow for movement to occur, flexible... the pipes that were installed years ago were not the types of pipes that we would use today (they're 6" vitreous clay)... depending on areas that are deemed to be houses allowed to resume...

m: anyone got qs for hunter water? If there's anything we can get a hold of and share with you, we will... you can come back to me w questions.

Nathan(?): any chance you can water my hedge?

laughter

m: anybody from Ausgrid?

w: no-show

m: any questions you'd like us to take to Ausgrid? safety? There was an issue a wk ago- one of the poles starting to move, the power was isolated. Ausgrid have certainly committed to if there's any work that needs to be done around the site... they will work with us.. get an email out to ppl...

bloke next to Nick Wang: I'm assuming that's the same w gas?

m: yes

same bloke: I'm getting letters from the gas saying that I have to pay or they'll disconnect me

m: They're little things but they're really frustrating! plz let me know- I'm always happy to write a letter. It's really inappropriate to write you a letter if that's what you're going through!

m: gonna talk about reovcer y cmommitee...formalt vover we sowrk u ndre normally what happens is the local emergen mgmt. committe will active the located .... (she's speaking very quickly and it's hard to parse & transcribe as it doesn't always make sense) ... they're local n most connected toe eh comjuni. the recon autho will come in and provide guidance to coucnils who have not been through that in the past. ... out of response phjase and into gfurther recovery... ive bene asked qs about wqhy ppl can't attend the first meting is around terms of terednex. the terms of referecen is something that cannot... in terms of memebership I've lead more that a dozen (of these) committees, not once have residents bene invivted,,, normally community would sit outside of that ... one service provder who comes n speaks to you no oyru sheabljf tjhe first meting was to confirm that bc it's not jsut our committe bc it's not jst us there are... that was accepted.. that's a really good outcome. the first meeting is around what's called an impatct assessment in terms of dif cost that has to be recovered undre hthe diaster recovery funding arrangement. ther'es nothing there really that i can't rtalk to u about gen but thet was a lcosed meeting for the goverment's conversation to take place n the good outcome from my perspective was the unanimous deiciosn to invite community to com e into this room... u can ... what our role is.. there.this parifual incicednet.. uas go AGRN 1212 is the clasisfiaont figen to this event to do w converstaions wit  diff departments ... there's nothing there that you ened to understand more than that. I'm chairing it, it does offer u a lvl of indiceptnece. u don't know me yet you odn't tryust me uet hta's ok... i don't acutlly work for CN.. to keep evyerone on track, bring resoudces tougher, that's my job.. as well as support you and make sreu you're being heard... it is chaired by myself Alicia is secretary provide by CN...reocklrd keeping units aleesha gets to work alongside me, keeps reocrds. Re CN n our rep Robert is the incident controller n Andy is project manger. u don't have to write it all down... 
i don't trust u yet

laughter

m: also Wade down the back, he's the local emergency management officer. incl prepartedness, adaptation... he works on that ongoing, and then we do have kylie ... from police, she is the commander for newy, she ... at the first meeting we had rep from police- steve benson, he was your  LEOCON while kylie was on leave. in the first meeting he acutally came, was really important, to brief those members who .... we have rep form the SES which was really important in the inital phsese, that may chage.. director of tech recov from RTA ... our access ot things like essential public assets, need ot conintue to work... still waiting to confirm a rep from the EPA

we have Sarah weiley form director of public works, has worked w me before.. Lismore.,.. they'll be doing .. some independ review from council. Rep Andrew Codrington from hunbter water. we have Subsidence autho aaron Mustafa(?) he's there at the table as well. we have repf ian McCarthy from .. health.. he's part of the community pubkic dassfeyt.we're not aware of any public hearlth onccerns . he oncnext us to hearlhty pservies,... emothion n physchosical support... we have the dep of communities n justice michelle McMahon .. temp accom alos the contact to access ... red cross n other agengies that have aMOU under ... emergency operations... in csome instances these ommittes can have subcommites. they re common, can range form business inducsties, tourism, health wellcbien, comms, community reference groups, funding, housing.. thats the the very large scale... we don't believe we need one of theseo ... nby having these sorts ' of meetings we have an open table

atm we are meeting monthly. we belive that with the plan and what orks that is enough to being ppl togheter... other meetings to not hold things up, other wise monthly meeteing. one of the eys things from this(?) first meeting is to sign off on... the next big task for us as agorup is to do the recovery needs asstesment. ... document things tougher ... we know that hungter water are gonna dispaprear on us bc they can't do anytihg for a period of time... accountability n hacving plans in plans... we hope to have the ocmunity help us deisng n deveop.
that's the loal recov committee.

Nathan: How long do the meetings go for?

m; the first one was 90 mins
-bc the number of stakeholders was quite large
m: yeah puts lotso f pressure on the chair... it's quite formal.. that's twaht thee gov is there for, to get rhough critical design making... ive been through longer 
m: any other q? ok so next item is ... ive got anhandout... community rep orle in local revocery commit.. this hasn't bene onde before. cmmitties r usually formed outside the main local reoc n health commit... there's no real precnet that we were ablt otuse to htink about how to do this best. keen to hear your thoughts baout how to ake this work... we awanna ensure that community memenbers at these meetings are given time to think about, talk about... meebrs of this community can eahr that and keep that in mind... really important that we kepe this live nad present and 

m: we will be asking to share ur perspectives n share concerns.. aghian we talk about why id'stj beend stood up it's a stragttegic decision.. allows us to asses the impacts, consqeunces of the things we're dinfding.... to ehlp us look at things such a s the recovery needs assemsenet andn the ondoingg actiona plans, help us understand around resource allocation, how we can contrinue to work w u moving fwds, making sure we're getting information out to relvant stakeholeders.... 6 principles from memore and that really guides us s a commimte. meetings are 1 hr, u do hav the option of attending in perons in stuart av or online. those links r sent out for each meeting. .... challenge... within each special interest maybe you can only come this month or nexgt mon... bit of a leanring curve for me.. not gonna get it right the first time but i wanna work w u to get it right.
ask u to engage respedtfullhy n openly.. helps us understand about things we don't know about including ... like annoying letters! we wann allow ppl t ororate though. .
what else do you reaelly need to know... there is a conflict of interest dec... if we were talking about an indicv property, other ppl would be askd to step out of the room, sensitive and secure information, but we would talk to u up front... need to just confirm that that doesn't entitle comuity reps to voting rights. 
things can be stressful.. we'll be offereding wellbeing upposrt... these meetings will be going on for some time. The nsw reco plan states that a local recovery team will be stood downwhen the local comjnity believs the recovery has been complete. OUR .. states that recovery will be considered complete when a MAJORITY...

... we want you to be a part of this... any qs?

warren: u mentioned u'd be sending info out... is that via email? we're not all connected. You mentioned we won't have a  sub committee... all...
m: that's a great question, some ppl will share their mobile number.. others r more private... that's why we wanna rotate. That doesn't take away ur ability to email in... all those other avenues still exist if u wanna raise them... we will report back after

w: report back via email?

-yes

w: ty

aaron: if you're looking for participation from residents why not just have it as a Teams meeting so that we can log in and view

m: that's a LOT of ppl in an additional meeting

aaron: they can just log in and watch

m: tbh my biggest concern is privacy for ppl, if u wanna talk to... we have a code of conduct... if i wanted to talk about my financial position or mental health...

a: yeah that's fine but you're talking about ... representatives...

m: not necessariliy.. individually.. if you're happy to come in and share... not excluding anybody from participating. you could elect one person right now but it limits ppl having that oppoturnity to see it for themselves and sharing their story

j: to be really clear you're not limited to communicating your experience and your needs through the community representation. You can do that through mel.

m: does that answer ur q? 

a: yeah, I don't agree with it....

m: everyone can be heard.

w:  if there's private n confidential information when I'm there, it's only when I'm pressing the button that 30 or 40 ppl in the meeting can hear... set in stone?

j: we have a number of agencies who have agreed to participate on the basis of this structure. We've already changed it by having community participation. I don't wanna go back and change it again.

m: ... i cannot make a commitment that .. i can get the full number of agencies to come out here... we can use meeting n forums like this to compliment the local recovery committee. so like..in synch

Mayor: I have to go... But I'd like to emphasise the comments that Jeremy made at the start: we are all incredibly frustrated & angry about the way frankly that the 15 households here are being short-changed compared to the response pattern that's been set elsewhere in the state... very storming letter to the minister about this! And that's going to be an ongoing challenge and I'd just like to emphasise our concern for you n the community's concern.

all: ty

m: any other qs about the revocery committe?

james: when can we access the ...

m: we're committed to being here as long as it takes... the final things is, iv'e heard logts of dif views tas to how often uwant metings like this, email uptdates, i have given everybody my peronal mobile number, it doesn't get turned off,..that is my eway of saying i really want u to work w me... want u to trust me, i will agree w u when things re ahrd n challgeenging, gonna take a little bit of time bc u don't know me... like i said gonna take u some time to understand thiat i am there to advoddate on ur habegl. other hitngs i wanns ahsre sandy and gary columns from the red corss have sponseorded for us some coffee cathcups if ppl wanna connect socially. bene apprentt to me that this is a close neghtbourhood. one way in one way out, evyerone knows.. stories... uyo're all in dif areas awawy from one another.. we wanna offer huge thx to red corss coffe cathcup to ppl who wanna connect... nolnine survey to waht tdates might suit. again im not gonna sit to tell u this might work, such n such a day, i want you to...

man in hi vis: i think .. decision gets made on the recover...
m: so email?
hi vis: key changes in the time line, Geotech, once that is completed id voe to hear Jeremy n the guys directly as to the results n the y can speak to them after they're peer reviewed n the results 
m: ... via email, ok...
Peta said something about minutes
mL --
hi vis: clarity; regular emails on ?, face-to-face on...
w: I agree. I think, again, trying to be flexible, if something does come up, it's simply the fact that if something comes up in 2-3 weeks' time n everyone thinks it's a good idea I think it's probably important we have that conversation
m: ... we certainly can put that across but that requires a little bit of trust...
next to ning (Nathan?): one of the key aspects is to be clear and straightforward about when the timeline changes, bc that's one of the things that makes me anxious... sitting there at xmas time thinking...
m: what we certinaly can do is show u what time line looks like w regards to key works... if that does change we can communicate w u but the last thing i wanna do is say to you, we're gonna have this done by such n such,
j interrupts: ... if there's additional boreholes, you wanna know that straight away? i understand.
nathan?: different expectations, but we are all...
yep
m: ... continuing to work togher keep us working in this open 2 eway process it does rely a little bit on that... front pg of herald.. i wanna reassure u i can c a  lot of ppl n n a lot of agents working really hard around the clock to do this... talk to reps.. it takes our time too. i would reather spend my time taking 2 hours to come here than talking to media...
r: comes up in the news...
julian: state gov... media is probly part of that process...
m: absoULUTELY and i waould never annwa take that waway.. this is hard work this is challeneging.. there's emotions.. just wanna make sure that you do know genuinely...
j: in terms of the nsw gov actually coming to the table there is nothing atm that is going to take their resistance... the letter that he wrote to the ministers.. councillors.. haven't even received an acknowledgement... how low a priority you sit right now... need to wait for the Geotech... look at the results, look at what happened in the other part of the state particularly where the minister LIVES... 
q: is that (couln't hear)
j: absolute
Peta: atm we don't have that Geotech evidence

q : we waited and heard CRIckets from you. is that, again, 
j: the advocacy work, i don't have any great expectations that our advocacy is gonna be successful w the state gov... any ... that we do won't pause the work we do with you. We will continue to support you (all) to the best of our ability... this ball is moving fwd.. getting nsw to come to the table won't affect that in any way
m: the average ministerial turnaround time is 28 days. I know that bc i used to work... everything goes through a process, that 's how gov works. We can be honest about u w what's hpanening but these things take time. we don't control how duikcly info ocmes back
jing: I think one of the hard deadlines from many of the ppl in the room is that there's a 12month deadline with their insurance-
m: and that's a concern absolutely-
jing: it's more than a concern-
j: we are aware of that. we r crystal clear. we don't ahve a solution. we are not dawdling
jing: we will need a solution before ... bc we need to know where are we going where are we going to stay
m: that's the thing though we cannot make promises... we cannot make that commitment-
jing: but we will need a solution
m: unfortunately that's one the things that we cannot-
j: we don't know what...

m: what do u (w&s) wanna get out of the findings? im' asking u a genuine q- when the findings come back to say what's going on we're gnot gonna have the answers straight away

sally: we need to give it to our insurance bc they're not gonna do anything without it

W: ...
m: ty
Caroline: ... fights w insurance companies bc .. I'm trying to find out what the outcomes was, we're not quite in the same boat.. it seems that in our country landslides are one of the worst things that can happen.. when you see how long it goes on for... when Council took over the recovery phase it very clearly said Council are not responsible for residential land, when it's very clear that most of the slip is on Council land
m: the hard part is what we do between now n then... we can look at other events that happened across nsw but we don't know 
suz: You have contacts with the insurance council of Australia?
m: we do
suz: is there a way that we can leverage and anticipate support?
j: _agreement noises_
m:  we can abvolseuty do that. what i will tell u is that photo evidence is really really important
suz: but what we ewant from you, can we get a strategy to hit the ground running as soon as this report comes out and ...
m: no, we don't have that but that's something we can lok at itf you want a groupd letter
s: ...
m: unfortunately we don't have permission to go onto private lands
s: I'll give you permission!
laughter
s: But playing devil's advocate, if I say "I don't wanna fix our house" then our block and all my neighbours have a problem. Are we looking at a broader site response from all the agencies?
r: id imagine that all the agencies... buy back... that's where you'd expect the RA to come in and buy back private properties
Nathan?: so the RA buy back private properties?
r: yeah
j: no the ???? .... u have a number of residents saying "no I don't want buy back"... but the nsw gov does have the power to compulsorily acquire...
nath?: but do they have the authority... drainage, retaining wall...
m:  another site...
n: 
m: there are dif conitoin on it u have to go back and look... the reconstruction act is  the reference that u need to go look at to c what powers they have around this... Lismore ppl wanted to stay at home... various house raising schemes but there was ahouse raising. for here, each packnage is done for set inidiv guidliens. there ere a lot of witonsos we acn ask
m: but maybe it would require some homewoneer contribution
j: we're jumping way ahead,...... she finished my qu
w: we raised it w her before u spoke w her that's why!
...
m: thye can't act til we know what we're looking at... until u tick 1 n 2 u don't know what 3 is
j: the irony is that getting the state gov to the table requires the Geotech results to be really bad. .... .n really the fact that it's gonna be.. truth is I briefed my councillors back when this happened n i said houses will be demolished n ppl will not b able to move back, don't need a report, don't know the exact number but it was apparent from day one... but the larger, the more compelling the case is for the state n maybe fed gov... it becomes about more than private property it becomes about community... we have a surplus of $250,000... we don't have the financial... not gonna have a meaningful conv w the gov until we understand what we're facing

caroline: we had that (day of no return) imprinted on us since we evacuated, but we spoke w laywers but rezoning is the last thing you want to have happen bc no one will want to buy it, so will the state gov want to buy that or will we have to walk away?
r: we dunno
aaron: we understand that it's speculation but we want to speculate. we want options rather than having to wait for anything definitive... spitball options just so we know... if the state gov steps in that's great. Not hearing "ok well..."... it requires us to go and research individually what the options are when it would be much better coming from you.
m: we can speculate if you want, that's fine , but the hard thing is for me ( INSERT FORUMALAIC RESPONSE)


nathan?: are there precedents w regards to the way RA have dealt w landslips? 
m: no ... tweed heads floods... there were landslips, ... reached out to tweed council... 
andy: i'm ahppy to talk tot it... i suppose it's in 2 parts ...we spoke to tweed council the area is quite dif... are a is shallower, ...very tiny, almost like a aalking track whih is owned by council sits under about 10 properties and on otp of farmland. it fell away and put those properties at risk...there aw s enough information agailable adn investigations bceamse apparent that it as n't going ot fall away... still a bit of going around in circles as to who's paying for what...
m: roads and access is probabky the most epxienced as to.. there as one major landlsupi in kempsye that isolated comujniaies, impact was on council owned rd. remediation options involved temp 4wd acess paths, these were not ideal  bc... we are in an unprecednented situation 
j: that's true we r in uncharted territotyr... no one wants to be the guinea pig. There's nothing on their website, nothing in their... that says that landslips are their (not their?) responsbislitiy.

nathan?: my overarching concern is that there's not a lot of clarity around how deep under the ground my property lies. If there's a problem that deep underground and I have to fix it, who's going to put the money in?
j: in terms of getting access you might say "well I could do that but my neighbours property needs to be demolished"... it's gonna be difficult as to if there's an engineering soln. looking at it lot by lot, isn't a solution. that's actually unhelpful...
r: 16 properties ... is Extremely unique. you'd ...RA use this...
laura: ...rain, seeing cracks really worried about the house, I know a lot of ppl have experienced that ,.. more rain coming, the geotechs r here, can they give us anything about what they've seen in the last 6 weeks... whether our houses are destined for demolition or...
r: i guess, they have only just started the investigation
m: (spoke a bunch) .... it would just be speculation though
laura: ...would really just like to hear what (geotech) Jeremy has to say...
(she has forced an answer. Everyone turns around. Can hear a pin drop)

geotech jeremy: the mvmt has moved further east. I can say to you that other residents have taken steps to protect & prop up the sections of their house that are still intact. I think Mr Bath is correct in that an engineering solution is going to go across boundaries. You've got to get access with some pretty major equipment. What we've got to penetrate to get something solid, to support some kind of retaining structure or anchor something... we're not talking about at guy w a crowbar... you see them (rigs) on high way sites-
m (forcefully): THANKS Jeremy (LOL)
W: there are still questions I have (for geotech Jeremy) on the methodology... 
m: send them!
w: ppl go away & think about questions for (geotech) Jeremy... is it appropriate to go away for...weeks and send those questions...
r: pre-emptive
w: the answer is idk which is fine... they
j: i think your question was about the scope?
w: it's about the scope... the point is other ppl might have the questions as well. We've only just flipped through it. Can we have another meeting with the Geotechs in 2 weeks?
m: i'm not gonna say yes bc i don't know what your usetions are yet!
lady: (missed it)
r: ... might go to the geotehc and say look we've been asked this by a resident...
j: what i ODN'T want is ... (rather) compile all the questions over the next 2 weeks and provide a single response
w: that's why I suggest... bc one quetions is reaised.. if we can have a ftf, bc via email... back and forwards...
m: yep, send them in! (Melissa did not acknowledge the request for a meeting here)
J: what i'm really saying is that we will not be responding to questions for 2 weeks.

discussions breaking off

m: there are times when iv'e gtg get advice. i'm gdoing lmy best ot go get answer, you might not like my response, i'm doing my best.. gotta be right... that's how we're committed to working with you

any more queitosn?
waht s for dinner
pizza!
m: drive throught on the way home!
else:
question from unknown. Steve?: is the state gov's response covered by the size of Newcastle? E.g. if 16 properties in (for example) Dungog Shire were evacuated, would Dungog have to write multiple letters to the state gov...
j: ...spoke about the pasha bulker storm, apparently the state government "held their hand" (Dungog's)
... this is Newcastle, this is New Lambton, there is no minister in this state electorate... its v. frustrating, the media have not helped, no-one has asked questions to the local member or the minister. (this is not true)
Caroline: Can I just say I believe my personal opinion going... this rain's going to... it's gonna get bigger... at what point will the state look at this and say...
m: bc of the natural disaster...
j: ...come to New Lambton and get meaningfully involved... 

(I missed parts here)
j: the enquiry will help but the enquiry is not gonna help you because ... got a 12 month deadline. .... the gov will hopefully accept those recommendations ...
Nathan?: most likely we'll have a change in govmt...
Peta: new enquiry... (j nodding)
j: the truth is that yours will be used as a case study and it will be used to help future residents
c: Victoria...
j: (note: he didn't let her speak about that much) ... you'll get the opportunity to tell the story about your hardship.... most importantly it will attract Sydney media.
Peta: that's why i encourage you to submit individual submissions... details... the enquiry is not just into this incident it's into RA... so exactly what j said. this is not gonna help u now. i heard some in the media today say it's an enquiry into this incident, it's not, it's... even more important to share your xp
julian: sounds like we need to be a bit more... (couldn't hear)
Peta: A group submissino might b powerful but imagine trying to get everyone's details in to the one submission. You'll miss details that are really important to you...much more beneficial that 16 responses...
m: just conscious of time. is there any other burning questions, feedback... the stage is yours.
(me: as long as you're not geotech Jeremy LOL) 
w: ty
m: we can get back together if something critical happens, but at any time, email me,... coffee.. ty Gary, red shirts up the back... plz drive safely





Editor's comments:
Melissa Gore said that the geotechnical scope of works was "peer reviewed".

Andy Ball said that it took a long time to put together the scope of works (SoW) and suggested that that was due to technical (engineering) complexity. As a geotechnical engineer myself, I would think that the most likely cause of the SoW not being approved by CN for many weeks would be budgeting concerns, &/or red tape (e.g. getting the RTA's involvement). It would be immediately clear to the geotechnical professional what the investigation calls for. That would be presented to the client (in this case, the City of Newcastle) and it would be up to the client to decide how much of the proposed testing, equipment, modelling etc. is needed and is able to be budgeted for.

* Robert's suggestion of compacting the soil here reflects a lack of understanding of geotechnical solutions, as does his dismissal of water management.
Realistic suggestions would have been efforts to identify and seal all cracks in pavement surfaces that are currently allowing surface water to penetrate to the landslide area, diverting surface water to stormwater networks in neighbouring catchments with temporary piping, placing a much larger number of tarps around the area to prevent water ingress (as long as suitable run-off channels or sumps can be made for the excess surface water),perhaps placing gabions at the toe, removing weight from the head, or installing short-term soil nails or grout some cables (especially now that the location of the slip surface has been identified), assigning a Council engineer to regularly inspect the dwellings inside the cordoned-off zone to pick up and act on new adjustments that need to be made as they arise (e.g. remove water from the pool out the back of 124 Russell Rd before it gets any heavier and falls into 123 Victoria St, help owners to arrange for repair of cracks in walls before mould sets in, etc.)
This is not to say that any of these suggestions are what should have been implemented, only that they are actually answers to Suzie's question of 'what could have been/can be done to reduce further damage to dwellings'. 





